#LyX 1.4.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 245
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme pslatex
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 10
\spacing single
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\leftmargin 3cm
\topmargin 3cm
\rightmargin 3cm
\bottommargin 3.5cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Description
Name: Zhe Wei Chong
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Student\InsetSpace \space{}
Number: 40899013
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Supervisor: Marius Portmann
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Project\InsetSpace \space{}
Title: Analyzing and Extending a Wireless Mesh Network Monitoring
 System
\begin_inset VSpace medskip
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Project\InsetSpace \space{}
Review:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On overall, the project has been progressing well.
 The project's main aims and motivations were identified early in the semester,
 all major deliverables thus far were completed on-time, and a working prototype
 of the wireless mesh networks has been developed.
 While the prototype is still lacking in features compared to what has been
 planned in the project plan, it will be used as a framework for future
 development to build upon, as well as a baseline for comparison to determine
 the efficiency worth of an improved monitoring system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In terms of items learned over the semester, mastering the use of new tools
 for producing and managing research proves to be greatly beneficial.
 IDEs (Integrated Development Environment) helped ease the process of learning
 the Python language for developing the prototype, and software such as
 LaTeX and BibTex were very useful for creating and managing documents and
 research references.
 Practising strict academic writing and referencing styles was challenging
 initially, and took some time to get used to.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Over the semester, the main research theme of the project has shifted as
 project requirements become more clearly defined.
 During the initial literature review, the selected project topic was fairly
 straightforward: it was apparent that most researchers have been attempting
 to tackle the problem of bandwidth efficiency for monitoring wireless networks
 using a distributed, peer-to-peer like architecture, thus testing that
 approach was selected as the primary approach for this project.
 However, this was found to be overly complex for the scope of an honours
 project, and the project was encouraged to focus more on solving current
 research problems required to build the wireless mesh monitoring system.
 At the same time several more research ideas were proposed, including testing
 the efficiency of multi-radio wireless mesh networks, and quantifying methods
 for querying wireless measurements from the mesh.
 Furthermore, considering that multi-radio wireless mesh networks is still
 a fairly new research topic with not many substantial results being documented,
 this presents an interesting research gap that can be used as a goal for
 the project.
 Thus, the research plan has been recently adjusted to reflect this decision.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However, research has been admittedly slow, especially for milestones that
 were planned to be completed by the end of the semester.
 While this was expected because I have opted to do 5 courses this semester,
 the workload required to be dedicated for research have been severely underesti
mated.
 Fortunately, all of the project deliverables are completed with little
 problems, with decent results.
 Note has been taken to review the project timeline more thoroughly to take
 into consideration more real-world factors however, for example assignments
 and holidays, which will likely demand attention away from research for
 periods of time.
 Because the workload for the next semester will be considerably lighter,
 hopefully this will no longer be an issue.
 I think, like most of my peers it is agreed unanimously that the importance
 of time management is one lesson that each of us "re-learn" every time,
 but never able to perfect.
 It is definitely an area that needs improving on as we continue to learn.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
(519 words)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
A copy of this submission was emailed to my supervisor on 04/06/2007 at
 1pm.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
