#LyX 1.4.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 245
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme pslatex
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing single
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Analyzing and Extending a Wireless 
\newline
Mesh Network Monitoring System
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing single
\noindent
\align center

\series bold
\size larger
Project Progress Report
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing single
\noindent
\align center

\series bold
\size large
Name:
\series default
 Zhe Wei Chong
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing single
\noindent
\align center

\series bold
\size large
Student\InsetSpace \space{}
Number
\series default
: 40899013
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing single
\noindent
\align center

\series bold
\size large
Supervisor:
\series default
 Marius Portmann
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\newpage

\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset LatexCommand \tableofcontents{}

\end_inset


\newpage

\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Statement of Purpose
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is a growing need for resilient and efficient networking technologies
 that can be deployed in environments where networking infrastructure does
 not exist.
 Wireless mesh networking is one of the recent developments in electronic
 communications that aims to achieve this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To determine the operational status of a wireless mesh network, the mesh
 may be monitored to record meaningful information and other useful statistics.
 Such statistics usually include wireless link information, network utilization,
 latency and packet routing history.
 These measurements can be aggregated and then analyzed.
 By observing the fluctuations in the resulting data, one may be able to
 estimate the overall 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

health
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of the mesh itself.
 As an example, an observed high packet loss rate and low signal strength
 hints that the wireless links may be too weak or too far apart.
 By collecting multiple relevant data for a wireless mesh network in one
 place, the process of troubleshooting wireless mesh networks may be greatly
 improved.
 The data can also be visualized and displayed as well, for example by plotting
 measurements taken against time, allowing the observer to clearly see any
 faults in the wireless mesh network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This thesis aims to research methods for monitoring and visualizing wireless
 mesh networks.
 The relevance of the project stems from several issues that need to be
 addressed for the development of wireless mesh networking by National ICT
 Australia (NICTA).
 Implementing an efficient monitoring and visualization system will improve
 researchers
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 ability to troubleshoot the mesh and speed up its development.
 There has not been much previous research on this area, as well as publicly
 available tools built for this purpose.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the same time, there has been renewed interest on the usage of multiple
 radio transmission channels in wireless mesh networking, although research
 on this area remains scarce.
 It is also not well established as to how much does a wireless mesh management
 architecture affect the efficiency of the mesh, and what are viable options
 for deploying one such framework.
 It is common to poll each node on the mesh network from a centralized setup,
 where each node responds to poll requests with management data.
 However there has been numerous proposals on decentralizing the management
 architecture for efficiency reasons.
 This project aims to carry out a number of studies for testing these concepts.
 Documenting the observations over the period of the project will allow
 better understanding on issues specific to this installation, such as routing
 protocol recovery and throughput.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Project Outline
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The main goal for this project is to implement a software package for monitoring
 and visualizing wireless mesh networks.
 This will involve analyzing previous work by NICTA, and implementing a
 number of improvements allowing it to be more efficient.
 The package consists of a number of separate modules, where each one will
 be built from existing and easily available software tools so it can be
 deployed on any number of mesh networks with minimum configuration.
 The modules include an interactive graphical interface for visualizing
 the traffic and network topology of wireless mesh networks, software to
 be deployed alongside existing wireless mesh architecture for gathering
 monitoring data, and other extensions to improve the workings of the wireless
 mesh network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In a real-world deployment, a wireless mesh network is likely to consist
 of up to hundreds or more of mesh nodes, scattered unevenly over an arbitrary
 coverage area.
 As such, the management architecture must be capable of scaling to a network
 of such size.
 To manage this mesh several factors to be considered would be network efficienc
y, reliability, accuracy, and especially in the case of user interfaces,
 ease of use.
 Several studies will be carried out based on a small-scale testbed in NICTA
 to formulate a hypothesis on efficient network management.
 As previously written, there is not much research on the collection and
 interpretation of monitoring data to determine the health of a mesh network.
 There are no standardized benchmark settings for conducting these experiments
 as well.
 Using NICTA
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

s testbed, an experimental monitoring system will be deployed and tested.
 Data gathered from the system is then visualized on the web interface.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Traffic generated from the testbed will be analyzed to evaluate the efficiency
 of the monitoring system.
 This will be determined by comparing captured traffic against those generated
 by the monitoring system on the testbed.
 A monitoring system should have minimal impact of the wireless mesh itself
 by generating less network overhead, or it may potentially affect the throughpu
t of other traffic.
 There has been previous research on reducing this overhead, including using
 a separate transmission medium for management traffic, and decentralizing
 the monitoring system.
 Some of these proposals will be reproduced on this testbed and evaluated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\newpage

\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Background
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Wireless Mesh Networking
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A wireless mesh network is a dynamically self-organized, self-configuring
 and self-healing networking architecture consisting of multiple wireless
 nodes interconnected in an ad-hoc manner 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Akyildiz2005}

\end_inset

.
 Nodes may contain mesh routing functions that forward packets on behalf
 of connected neighbors within range, wherein network traffic now flows
 through multiple 
\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset

hops
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 to reach their destination, or they may be simple mesh clients connected
 to the wireless mesh a la architecture mode.
 Using this networking architecture the coverage range of a wireless network
 can be extended greatly.
 This ability that allows them to be deployed where no existing networking
 architecture is in place makes them suitable for applications such as emergency
 response, transport applications (for example 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Obana2006}

\end_inset

), community networking (for example the MIT 
\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset

Roofnet
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 project 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{1080833}

\end_inset

) and rural environments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Akyildiz et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
identifies three type of mesh networks compositions 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Akyildiz2005}

\end_inset

.
 
\emph on
Client mesh
\emph default
 networks are identical to conventional ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc networks.
 The mesh consists of an arbitrary number of client nodes that participate
 in mesh packet routing themselves, and may also provide end-user services.
 As such, there is no need for a centralized service provider to manage
 the operation of the network itself, for example conventional network routers.
 However, physical requirements for client nodes such as battery and processing
 power will be considerably higher in order to support these additional
 functions; currently, this problem still remains an active research area
 for the use of low energy consumption mobile ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc networks.
 On the other hand, 
\emph on
infrastructure mesh
\emph default
 networks rely on centralized mesh nodes in the network to provide routing
 functionality.
 Mesh routers form the backbone of the wireless network, while mesh clients
 passively consume the service provided by the routers without participating
 in routing, thus easing the problem of power requirements mentioned previously.
 Network connectivity may be derived from already existing technologies
 such as IEEE 802.11, GPRS and even Ethernet, allowing common end-user devices
 such as mobile phones and Wi\SpecialChar \-
Fi capable laptop computers to transparently
 access the mesh network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Hybrid mesh
\emph default
 networks inherit the advantages of both client and infrastructure mesh
 networks by combining both architectures.
 Client nodes may be directly connected to mesh routers, or they may implement
 routing functionality and participate in meshing with other nodes as well,
 at the same time enhancing the existing network architecture.
 Due to its flexibility and attractiveness for commercial use this approach
 has been gaining traction in research, and is relevant to the aims of this
 project.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Network Monitoring
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The performance of wireless communications may be affected by several factors.
 The medium itself is highly unreliable and may be easily influenced by
 environmental conditions and radio interference.
 Other networking factors such as protocols used, contention of bandwidth
 and hardware or software faults further complicate the process of diagnosing
 the network.
 By observing the packet loss rate and throughput of a wireless mesh network,
 this makes identify problems in the wireless mesh network easier.
 Comparing these against other collected data such as network topology and
 medium statistics allows erratic links in the mesh to be pinpointed and
 singled out 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{1163597}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are several methods as to how data may be gathered.
 The most common approach using existing standards is by using the 
\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset


\emph on
Simple Network Management Protocol
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 (SNMP) 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Henderson2006}

\end_inset

.
 An 
\emph on
SNMP manager 
\emph default
is responsible for polling a preconfigured number of nodes present on the
 mesh containing 
\emph on
SNMP agents
\emph default
.
 An agent is an executable software module which mediates the access of
 information in the nodes by the manager.
 Useful variables regarding the nodes
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 condition are described as 
\emph on
managed objects
\emph default
, and are stored in a 
\emph on
Management Information Base
\emph default
 (MIB).
 The level of detail can be further extended with vendor-specific MIBs,
 for example wireless signal strength and MAC address.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{SNMP-performance}

\end_inset

However, to achieve almost real-time monitoring, the SNMP poll interval
 must be frequent enough.
 This results in additional traffic within the mesh that may overload the
 network and impact its performance.
 In their multi\SpecialChar \-
hop wireless network study Qiu et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
reports that data collection
 overhead is relatively low and will not affect significantly application
 traffic in the network 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{1163597}

\end_inset

.
 However the scale of the test is relatively small with only up to 50 nodes,
 thus the study may not be accurate in real-world wireless mesh deployments.
 Henderson and Kotz observes that an interval of below 5 minutes may already
 saturate a wired LAN 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Henderson2006}

\end_inset

.
 The network addresses of the agents must also be identified beforehand
 for the SNMP poll messages to be transmitted.
 This makes traditional SNMP unsuitable to be used with wireless mesh networks,
 where mobile mesh nodes may be capable of leaving and joining the mesh
 network at any time.
 Besides, in client mesh networks where nodes may be at least two hops away
 from the SNMP manager the traffic gathered will also be inaccurate as it
 may be skewed towards the nodes with many indirect neighbors, leading to
 an inaccurate analysis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sending management traffic through a wireless mesh network mixing with legitimat
e traffic is known as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

in-band
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 As previously mentioned this is reportedly undesirable, as it may potentially
 affect the performance of the mesh.
 Relying on in-band data distribution may also cause nodes to be unreachable
 for management purposes if the links used for mesh routing are disconnected
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Ramachandran2005}

\end_inset

.
 An alternate method is to use an external channel dedicated for delivering
 management traffic to other stations on the network, or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

out-of-band
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 In conditions where the wireless mesh routers are close to each other Ethernet
 may be used as the transmission medium.
 Ramachandran et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
proposes stacking additional wireless mesh routers on
 existing ones, carrying out management functions via a second wireless
 mesh network 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Ramachandran2005}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another commonly used tool for gathering statistics regarding the data on
 a network is packet 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

sniffing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Qiu2003}

\end_inset

, which refers to the capturing of all network traffic that can be listened
 to by a machine.
 The network interface will have be placed into 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

promiscuous
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 mode in order to receive the network traffic.
 These traffic data can then be analyzed using specific tools to retrieve
 useful information, such as sender and recipient addresses, protocol used
 and, by stripping away low-layer packet headers, contents of higher-layer
 packets.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Distributed Network Management
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To reduce the amount of traffic directly between manager and agents Chen
 et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
proposed the 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset

Ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc Network Management Protocol
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 (ANMP) for mobile ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc networks, an architecture that clusters nodes hierarchi
cally 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Chen1999}

\end_inset

.
 Agents that are near to each other are clustered together, electing one
 or more capable nodes as their 
\emph on
cluster head
\emph default
, which in turn is managed by a 
\emph on
network manager
\emph default
.
 ANMP implements a MIB extension to return geographical positioning, battery
 power and other cluster-related information.
 The cluster head retrieves these measurements from all of its agents, aggregate
s it and transmits it to its manager.
 As mobile nodes move around they can leave and join clusters with very
 low message overheads.
 This design drastically increases the statistics gathering process efficiency
 while allowing managed nodes to be mobile.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Shen et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
identifies that in a multi\SpecialChar \-
hop ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc network consisting of many
 highly mobile nodes there needs to be a framework which can better adapt
 to dynamically changing network conditions 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Shen2002}

\end_inset

.
 They proposed the 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset

Guerrilla management architecture
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

, which allows manager nodes, or 
\emph on
nomadic managers
\emph default
, to be more autonomous, similar to the concepts of 
\emph on
agents
\emph default
 in artificial intelligence.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ramachandran et.
 al.\InsetSpace \space{}
proposes a different approach that takes advantage of less mobile yet
 more capable nodes for pervasive monitoring 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Ramachandran2004}

\end_inset

.
 The 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset

Distributed Architecture for MONitoring mobile networks
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 (DAMON) introduces two unique concepts, categorizing management data in
 relation to temporal significance, and 
\emph on
data sinks
\emph default
 for aggregating information.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Current Work and Problems
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As part of the Smart Transport and Roads (STaR) project, NICTA is developing
 a wireless mesh network implementation as a traffic systems communication
 platform.
 The current experimental mesh testbed consists of a number of Linksys WRT54GL
 multi-radio wireless routers using the 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset

Ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc On-demand Distance Vector
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 (AODV) routing protocol 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{rfc3561}

\end_inset

.
 The wireless routers are installed with the OpenWRT Linux distribution
 and 
\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset


\emph on
aodvd
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 (AODV Daemon) to facilitate the mesh routing process.
 The routers are also connected via Ethernet link, in which management data
 is gathered.
 While the routers have to be placed in proximity of each other due to space
 limitations, packet filtering is configured in each of the devices
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

 routing table forcing packets to be directly only through certain paths
 of the network.
 Thus, a wireless mesh topology may be simulated as if there is a physical
 distance between the nodes and each mesh router is only within signal range
 of a selected few of its neighbors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wireless communication is limited to half-duplex transmissions in that while
 receiving radio signals a wireless radio must be placed into promiscuous
 listening mode and thus cannot send at the same time 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Henderson2006}

\end_inset

, thus halving the effective throughput of the network link.
 Mähönen et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
also observes that TCP and UDP throughput drops rapidly as
 the number of hops in a homogeneous multi\SpecialChar \-
hop 802.11 network setup with a
 single radio per node
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Maehoenen2006}

\end_inset

.
 Recent research on using multiple radios prove that it is capable to address
 these shortcomings.
 A multi\SpecialChar \-
radio wireless router is equipped with more than one wireless network
 interface, thus capable of transmitting and receiving over multiple radio
 channels at the same time.
 This approach effectively increases the radio spectrum bandwidth available,
 and by reducing interference and contention in the network helps to minimize
 the delay in data transmissions, but it also increases the complexity of
 programming in order to provide proper synchronization between radio interfaces.
 In a recent study by NICTA, Pirzada et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
proves that an improvement to
 the AODV protocol to better support multiple radios performs significantly
 better, especially under high load where more network contention lead to
 a higher packet loss rate 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{1164791}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Currently, there are several problems that need to be addressed for the
 wireless mesh project, some of which will be addressed in this study.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
SNMP is used to monitor the traffic flow for each node in the mesh.
 A central server executes several scripts that polls a preconfigured number
 of mesh routers over Ethernet to retrieve the current data rate and established
 routes by AODV.
 However, this has been proven inefficient (see Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{SNMP-performance}

\end_inset

).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The gathered data is parsed and used to generate graphs, with one image
 file per network interface.
 However, in a mesh network populated with many multi\SpecialChar \-
radio routers presenting
 all of the images will require a large screen space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Interest on mobile ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc networks has been considerably active for the past
 decade, with a large amount of research dedicated to solving problems in
 wireless mesh networking recently.
 The concept opens up many interesting ideas that may be applied to commercial
 and industrial applications, however we have yet to see widespread use
 of ad\SpecialChar \-
hoc networking principles in these areas.
 Mähönen et al.\InsetSpace \space{}
confirms this, and suggests that this field is not yet mature,
 and that there is still many problems in the aspects of engineering theory
 and applications that require solving 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Maehoenen2006}

\end_inset

.
 There is not much research on the the visualization of wireless mesh networks.
 Moreover, the methods for building and deploying an efficient wireless
 mesh monitoring architecture are not well established.
 This thesis, as well as research work currently being undertaken at NICTA,
 will touch on these concepts that are still not yet fully explored.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\newpage

\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Project Plan
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Overall Goals and Specific Aims
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The aim of the research is to develop an intuitive interface to NICTA
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

s wireless mesh monitoring system.
 This involves building modules for collecting monitoring data, aggregating
 into meaningful graphs, and presenting them coherently.
 With it the network topology, overall health and traffic flow of the wireless
 mesh can be observed, which allows the underlying design of the mesh to
 be evaluated more easily.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The data collected will include generic measurements such as data throughput,
 packet loss, response times and routing, as well as specific 802.11 information,
 such as link quality, signal strength and noise.
 To achieve this an SNMP MIB extension will have to be prepared that is
 capable of retrieving these measurements from the mesh node itself.
 This data is then fed to a graphical imaging tools to be displayed on the
 web interface.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Studies will also be carried out by applying different approaches to the
 wireless mesh monitoring system while observing the overall status of the
 mesh.
 This is particularly to confirm whether it is possible to significantly
 improve data dissemination within the mesh using a decentralized approach
 compared to conventional methods.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Tasks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The project will include several tasks executed in parallel, described as
 follows.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Web Interface
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A basic web interface will be created to display the images for each wireless
 mesh node interface generated from the SNMP gatherers.
 The original interface by NICTA was created within a Perl script, making
 it hard to modify if changes are required.
 The new web interface should be further improved to enhance its usability
 and aesthetics.
 To allow the displaying of multiple graph images on the screen, interactive
 controls will be added to allow toggling of appearance, hiding graphical
 details from the user if it is not necessary.
 It will also act as a simple control panel for the data gatherer modules
 (see Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sub:tasks-SNMP}

\end_inset

), allowing the interface update and polling interval to be changed dynamically.
 As an overview, the design itself is rather simple: The interface is split
 in three sections, that is, network topology diagram, traffic/statistics
 graphs, and control panel for manipulating the display preferences.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
SNMP
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sub:tasks-SNMP}

\end_inset

The original modules by NICTA will have to be rewritten to make it more
 readable and modular so it may be easily maintained in the future.
 This includes rewriting the SNMP scripts in Python and sending the data
 to RRDtool 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Oetiker}

\end_inset

 via Python bindings to generate the traffic graphs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The monitoring system architecture will be extended to support reading custom
 attributes via SNMP, namely 802.11 information for each wireless interface.
 This will be achieved by implementing a custom SNMP MIB that retrieves
 these readings from the operating system so that it may be read by an SNMP
 manager.
 SNMP traps will be implemented to inform the SNMP manager when a link failure
 has been identified in any of the network interfaces.
 This allows the wireless connection breakage to be quickly identified and
 visualized on the web interface.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Testbed
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sub:Testbed}

\end_inset

When a wireless mesh testbed has been setup, several tests will be carried
 out to justify the efficiency of the mesh monitoring system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Management traffic on the mesh will be captured and measured to determine
 if the efficiency of a wireless mesh network will be severely impacted
 by traffic generated from the underlying management architecture, namely
 SNMP.
 By comparing traffic captured with no SNMP monitoring and some SNMP monitoring
 with differing intervals, the overhead of the management architecture can
 be measured.
 Another test will also determine whether using a separate or external channel
 for gathering management data will significantly improve the aforementioned
 situation.
 This involves alternating the SNMP management infrastructure from polling
 via Ethernet, as it currently does, and polling through the wireless mesh
 itself.
 To realistically simulate network usage, real-time data streams may be
 executed at the same time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the experiments, wireless network traffic will be captured using active
 packet sniffing tools, such as 
\begin_inset Quotes els
\end_inset


\emph on
Wireshark
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

.
 To obtain meaningful data the captured data will have to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

cleansed
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 by analyzing and categorizing the packets into normal traffic, such as
 TCP and HTTP packets, and management traffic generated by SNMP.
 This allows a clean comparison of the two packet numbers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Software Resources
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Any software and development tools that will be used for the duration of
 this project are summarized in Table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{tab:Software-Resources}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Float table
placement H
wide false
sideways false
status open

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="5" columns="2">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0">
<column alignment="center" valignment="middle" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="3in">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
Category
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="middle" topline="true" bottomline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none" width="3.5in">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
Software Used
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Operating System
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Ubuntu Linux, OpenWRT
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Programming Languages
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Python, PHP, C, HTML and JavaScript
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Development Environment
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Generic text editor
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Other Software
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
NET SNMP, Weathermap, RRDtool, LightTPD, Wireshark
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Caption
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{tab:Software-Resources}

\end_inset

Software Resources
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Timeline
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Due to the complexity of this project the tasks above will be assigned into
 individual phases.
 An estimated duration that starts from week 1 of the year is assigned to
 each phase, which may not be accurate, but serves as a general guideline
 for the development of project tasks and keeping track of deadlines.
 Because this project is executed in parallel with research at NICTA, like
 iterative software development lifecycles phases are not mutually exclusive;
 some work will unevitably overlap with other phases if they have not been
 completed, or returned to afterwards if new tasks and requirements have
 been identified.
 To affirm the timeline for this project, milestones are set to mark the
 estimated completion time for certain significant tasks and related deliverable
s for the thesis (See Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sub:Project-Calendar}

\end_inset

).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Initiation Phase
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At this phase, requirements from NICTA was collected to identify the goals
 for this project and documented.
 Background research work was started to review any relevant literature,
 gain background knowledge and identify current trends in the research area.
 Aims for this project, a summary of work to be done and the results of
 the literature review is included in this document.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Duration: 5 weeks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Phase I - Basic Monitoring and Visualization
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This phase includes the completion of a basic monitoring system and web
 interface, with no additional features.
 The monitoring system will be based on a miniature testbed of only 3 wireless
 mesh routers installed with SNMP agents.
 Both the web interface and gatherer modules will be rewritten.
 The scripts will poll the wireless mesh routers using SNMP, and retrieve
 a set number of statistics relevant to each network interface for the router.
 The web interface will be capable of displaying traffic graphs generated
 from the SNMP data, and a network topology map displaying link statistics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Duration: 5 weeks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Phase II - Pilot Studies
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This phase involves further identifying issues that need to be addressed
 for NICTA's wireless mesh network project and documenting previous research
 and other ideas related to them.
 This may include client auto-discovery on the monitoring system, studies
 on multi\SpecialChar \-
channel mesh, router link state exporting and reading, SNMP traps,
 and alternative methods on gathering monitoring data and visualizing network
 topologies.
 Simple implementations to demonstrate these findings will be programmed
 based on the miniature testbed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Duration: 4 weeks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Phase III - Testbed Studies
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Several studies will be carried out on NICTA
\begin_inset Quotes ers
\end_inset

s testbed (see Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sub:Testbed}

\end_inset

).
 These tests will also attempt to directly address problems faced by NICTA.
 Based on data recorded from the tests, improvements to the management architect
ure to increase its efficiency and suitability to large-scale wireless mesh
 networks will be proposed and documented.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Duration: 10 weeks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Phase IV - Full Implementation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All requirements have already been determined.
 Planned features, such as web framework and control panel, will be implemented
 and tested along the way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Duration: 6 weeks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Phase V - Finalizing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This phase includes finalizing the code development for this project.
 Code will be tested through automated testing to detect any last bugs and
 any defects promptly fixed.
 The product is demonstrated to a number to gauge their responses, which
 determines the usability of the software.
 Code documentation is completed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Duration: 4 weeks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Project Calendar
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sub:Project-Calendar}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All milestones and important dates for the project are listed in Table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{tab:Project-Calendar}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Float table
placement H
wide false
sideways false
status open

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="20" columns="2">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="middle" leftline="true" width="0">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="4in">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Date
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Milestone / Activity Description
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
6 March
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Background research started
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
13 March
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Annotated bibliography
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
20 March
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Project Plan
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
2 April
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Simple wireless testbed
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
10 April
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Progress Report draft
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
20 April
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Project Progress Report
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
28 April
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Completion of basic web interface components
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
30 April
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Starting Project Seminar preparation
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
7 May
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Completion of network topology generation using new Weathermap tool; Wireless
 mesh testbed is set up; Testing on wireless link throughput and other measureme
nts
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
14 May
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Project Seminar
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
21 May
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Completion of web interface
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
28 May
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Project Review
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
4 June
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Completion of SNMP notification (traps) prototype; Experiments on automatic
 configuration of mesh clients, multi-channel radio efficiency, and distributed
 SNMP monitoring
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
16 July
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Implementation report; Further experiments
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
13 Auguest
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Efficiency tests on system prototype
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
3 September
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Completion of system prototype
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
18 September
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Thesis draft; Completion of final web interface and management framework
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
1 October
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Poster and Abstract; Starting testing and documentation
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
22 October
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Final thesis document
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Caption
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{tab:Project-Calendar}

\end_inset

Project Calendar
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Risk Assessment
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Possible risks to occupational health and safety are listed in Table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{tab:Risk-Assessment}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Float table
placement H
wide false
sideways false
status open

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="7" columns="2">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="3.5in">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Assessment
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Description
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Risk
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Electromagnetic emissions from 802.11 wireless routers
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Evaluation
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
The wireless routers transmit electromagnetic signals at the 2.4Ghz spectrum
 and may interference to other consumer devices operating on the same wireless
 spectrum.
 They are certified to comply with the FCC rules and do not cause harmful
 interference.
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Exposure
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Medium
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Consequence
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Minor
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Risk Category
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Low
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
Recommendation
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
All wireless routers will be placed at least 1 meters away from people when
 setting up the testbed, and switched off when not in use.
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Caption
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{tab:Risk-Assessment}

\end_inset

Risk Assessment
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\newpage

\begin_inset LatexCommand \bibtex[bibtotoc,ieeetr]{Thesis}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
